Feedback on tables (#184)
CaptainSifff/paper_teaching-learning-RSE: competencies.md

> - Senior RSE: They have gained experience and can set the standards in a software project.

Reviewer: I can't add a comment to the above line for Junior RSE but a suggested rewording to the Junior RSE text:
" - Junior RSE: These are people who are in the earlier stages of their RSE career journey, but they should still have the skills to contribute reliable and well-structured code to software projects."

Author: Added manually, thanks!

- Principal RSE: Their actual job description varies a lot. These may be RSE team leaders based in a professional services type role, or they may be professors or research group leaders based in a more academic-focused role. They are often the people responsible for bringing in the funding that supports new projects and sustains existing projects. Generally speaking, they do not need to be actively involved in the day-to-day technical tasks but they should be able to guide projects from both a technical and a research perspective while providing an inclusive working space.

@tbl:comp-lvls-se, @tbl:comp-lvls-res, and @tbl:comp-lvls-comm elaborate on the required facets of the competencies in different roles.
A story-like example of an individual through the hierarchies can be found in @subsec:examplecareer .

\blandscape
\small
\renewcommand*{\arraystretch}{1.4}

> | Competency | Junior RSE                                                                                                                    | Senior RSE                                                                                                                            | Principal RSE (brings in funding)                                                                                                                          |

Author: I agree, I thought there was a good reason to have it there. Thanks for bringing this up!

| ---        | ----------                                                                                                                    | ----------                                                                                                                            | ----------                                                                                                                                                 |
| DOCBB      | Should be able to write reusable building blocks.                                                                             | Same as junior, but the quality should set the standard for the project, while following current best practices.                      | Should know the current best practices and point their staff to the right resources.                                                                        |

> | LIBS       | Should be able to use package distribution platforms.                                                                         | Same as junior, but should set the project standard and follow current best practices.                                                | Should ensure that their project is in an up-to-date distribution platform.                                                                                |

Author: I am adding all the suggestions, but I may need to reword some for pagination reasons later.

| SWLC       | Should be aware of the software life-cycle.                                                                                   | Should know which decisions lead to technical debt.                                                                                   | Should know in which part of the life-cycle their project is and how to steer development/project resources accordingly.                                   |

> | SWREPOS    | Should seamlessly interact with the repository of their project.                                                              | Should be well-versed in the intricacies of a repository, and probably interact with repositories of multiple projects.               | Should be able to effectively interact with repositories and especially the interaction with the connecting projects.                                      |

Author: Very good point! Also, the formulation before did not make complete sense.
Fixed it.

| TEACH      | Should be able to perform simple peer-to-peer on-boarding tasks.                                                              | Should be able to explain logical components and the general architecture to other RSEs.                                              | Should be able to effectively communicate about all high-level parts of the project.                                                                      |
| PM         | Should be aware of the employed project management method.                                                                    | Should be able to use and adapt the employed PM method.                                                                                         | Should be able to design and adapt the employed PM method.                                                                                                 |

> | USERS      | Should be able to communicate with non-SE users of the project.                                                               | Same as junior RSE, and be able to interpret the feedback.                                                                            | Same as junior, and take feedback into account of the steering                                                                                             |

Reviewer: It feels like something is missing here in the Principal section (or maybe it's just the full stop?! 🙂). Anyway, here's a suggested update:
```suggestion
| USERS      | Should be able to communicate with non-SE users of the project.                                                               | Same as junior RSE, and be able to interpret the feedback.                                                                            | Same as senior, and should also be able to effectively take feedback into account when steering the project.                                                                    |
```

## Project team structures

In @tbl:teams-se, @tbl:teams-res, and @tbl:teams-comm, we look at individual or team competencies and approaches to them,
considering how these differ depending on whether an RSE or researcher is working alone on a software project,
or whether they are working as part of a team of research software developers.
We extend this to consider how things differ when a developer or a group
of developers is based locally within a research team or department,

> or when they are based in a dedicated RSE team.

Reviewer: Maybe add "centralised" to the RSE team? e.g. 
```suggestion
or when they are based in a dedicated, centralised RSE team.
```

- **Competency:** The code assigned to the competency being considered, as defined in @sec:required-generic-skills.
- **Individual developer (Locally-based):** A single person working on some
  research software - often a researcher with RSE skills. Often time-constrained,
      may be self-taught.
- **Individual developer (RSE team-based):** A single person working on research
  software - generally a professional RSE assigned to support another team's software on their own,
  who however is connected to an RSE team.
- **Group of developers (Locally-based):** A group of RSEs/researchers within
  a research group or team, working together on developing software to support
  or undertake a single research goal/project.
  Similarly to the individual RSE, they are often researchers with RSE skills,
  often self-taught.
- **Group of developers (RSE team-based):** A group of members of the RSE team
  working together on a research software project for a research group.
- **Organisation-level support:** How the defined competencies are recognised
  and represented at an organisational level and what the organisation can

>   do to support the RSEs at the different team structures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  do to support the RSEs in the context of the different team structures.
```

    \cline{2-5}
              & Locally-based & RSE-Team based & Locally-based & RSE-Team based &\\\hline
    %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
    DOCBB &
    Focuses on getting outputs to support research. Is not very familiar with code quality and
      structure. Follows basic best practice guides.&
    Puts greater focus on reusability, documentation, and knowledge of best practices,
      but potentially lacks domain knowledge.&
    Has more opportunities to discuss and share ideas, but team members may be
      less aware of key practices. &
    Has stronger ingrained focus on team-based PM and development
      methodologies, resulting in higher quality, more reusable code.&
    Should offer training and other resources in core topics to support individual developers.
      Should have research software guidance/policies that provide advice.\\
    \hline
    %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
    LIBS&
    Does not emphasise code reusability and sharing/distribution. &
    Puts greater focus on reusability/sharing, but likely not as part of the project aims.&

>     May want to develop reusable shareable outputs for a specific case. Needs easy resources.&

Reviewer: In general this section is great, I'm just a little unclear what is meant by "Needs easy resources."? Is this "Needs easy access to resources." or "Needs access to easy to use resources.", or maybe something different - I think this is probably written as it is because we're very constrained on space here but I think it would be good to add a slight clarification here if possible.

Author: This was written like this before I jump in, and I have no clue what it is supposed to mean. `git blame` tells me that @CaptainSifff may be able to help us here:

https://github.com/CaptainSifff/paper_teaching-learning-RSE/pull/19/commits/79b99001e4d022f1554867ccfd7fa9031a3ad3ba

Author: Replaced `Needs easy recources.` with `Needs clear guidelines.`, as I assume this is the main challenge of a local team.

Reviewer 2: Guidelines sounds perfect here. the easy was meant to mean, that the available guidelines should be easily available to the users, because they would not follow them.

    Focuses on quality and best practices. Reusability/packaging driven by project needs and spec.&
    Should provide policies on reusability/sharing. May be driven by requirements/policies of the funding agency.
    \\\hline
    %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
    SWLC&
    Manages the complete life-cycle, bus factor equal to 1.&
    The team supports parts of the software life-cycle, but with low bus factor.&
    The team infrastructure and tooling supports the life-cycle and sustainability.&
    The bus factor may still be low in parts of the code.
      Need to think about coherent life-cycle management across the team - generally

>       a key expertise of an RSE team.&

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      a key area of expertise for an RSE team.&
```

      although they may not have domain knowledge, which a group can provide.&
    Is familiar with the RC and can share knowledge within the team.&
    One or more members of the team are strongly aware of the
      RC.&
    Should provide extensive infrastructure to manage
      the research life-cycle, supporting researchers/RSEs.
    \\\hline
    %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
    SRU&
    Has limited awareness of existing solutions and limited support in this regard.&
    Is familiar with software sharing and can discover tools and platforms.&
    As per individual (local), but being part of a team can help to address this.&
    As per individual (RSE Team).&
    Should run local environments to host software, catalogue software,
      and/or provide institution-level access to platforms that support this.
    \\\hline
    %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
    SP&
    Has limited knowledge and motivation regarding software publication.&
    Applies practices, workflows, and policies established in the RSE team.&
    As per individual (local) developer.&
    As per individual (RSE Team).&

>     Should raise awareness about software as publishable scientific output, provide recommendations and checklists to support software-publications, and have legal experts in place to deal with complex cases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Should raise awareness about software as a publishable scientific output, provide recommendations and checklists to support software publications, and have legal experts in place to offer advice on complex cases.
```

    Domain researchers working on software are likely to be more familiar
      with the domain-specific solutions.&
    RSEs may need guidance from domain researchers around domain-specific
      repositories if they have a background in a different domain.&
    As per individual (local).&
    As per individual (RSE Team).&
    Should host domain-specific repositories for areas that the organisation works
      extensively in, but this is likely to be handled at a research group level.
    \\\hline
  \end{longtable}

\newpage

\begin{longtable}{|p{1.8cm}|p{3.5cm}|p{3.5cm}|p{3.5cm}|p{3.5cm}|p{4.5cm}|}
    \caption{Levels of communication skills expected per team structure.}\label{tbl:teams-comm}\\
    \hline
    \multirow{2}{*}{Competency} & \multicolumn{2}{c|}{Working as an individual developer}
    & \multicolumn{2}{c|}{Working with a group of developers} & \multirow{2}{*}{Organisation-level support} \\
    \cline{2-5}
              & Locally-based & RSE-Team based & Locally-based & RSE-Team based &\\\hline
    %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
    USERS&
    May have additional skills to safeguard potential future development

>       and maintenance of the software for external users.&

Reviewer: Suggesting a minor addition here:
```suggestion
      and maintenance of the software for external users. Resourcing for future maintenance may be a challenge.&
```

Author: I am adding this, but I think it is rather clear that when one is working alone, they cannot guarantee that there will be resources in the future.

Reviewer: I think my comment was driven more by the fact that resourcing was mentioned in one of the other columns but not here - if you're happy to add it that's great, but if space is an issue, feel free to remove it.

      future development and maintenance of the software for external users.&
    Needs to safeguard future development and maintenance of the software for
      external users, but may not have the skills or resources to support this.&
    Applies best practices to prepare the code for external users,
      while the team provides infrastructure and/or specialised RSEs for user support. &
    Should have institutions that are able to offer support with outreach and publicising outputs.
    \\\hline
    %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
    TEACH&
    May be independently involved in training activities.&
    May be able to support researchers with core technical skills.&
    Shares knowledge and skills within the group (peer support).&
    Supports teaching more widely, either through organised courses
      or ad hoc activities such as ``code clinics''.&
    Should have programs for a diverse range of teaching/training activities,
      such as an RSE curriculum, as described in~\autoref{subsec:examplemaster}.
    \\\hline
    %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
    PM&

>     Is well-organised, in order to be able to transfer the codebase to future developers.&

Reviewer: I didn't want to change this but I think this currently represents an aim rather than widely-applied current practice - I guess that's what this table is trying to do, so maybe it's fine, but I think that it's more common, at the moment, for a lone developer within a research team (especially if they're a researcher rushing to get results for a paper deadline, for example!) to neglect key project management approaches that can support sustainability of code. That's a generalisation and there will of course be some researcher/developers who are super organised with these things but traditionally, I don't think that's always been the case.

Author: >  think this currently represents an aim rather than widely-applied current practice - I guess that's what this table is trying to do, so maybe it's fine

Indeed, this table is now shaped to have the aim perspective. Previously, it was rather mixed. I have also added a disclaimer in the main text that reality may differ.

Author: Besides, the current formulation sets a very low barrier. It essentially tells "don't dump your complete `/home/` in a zip file to give to the next people before disappearing from the face of Earth".

I reformulated this to "Is organised enough to be able to...". This should be clearer.

We also look at organisational aspects in the context of each of the considered
competencies, since there are a variety of ways that organisations can contribute

> to and support them. Some of them are brought to life in the example career path of the appendix.

Reviewer 2: While at it, we should add the proper markdown reference to the appendix here.

Author: Added:

![Screenshot from 2023-11-14 17-25-08](https://github.com/CaptainSifff/paper_teaching-learning-RSE/assets/4943683/508f4d1f-47e5-4cb5-b294-46c66686bd3d)

We first summarise the meaning of each of the columns in the tables:

- **Competency:** The code assigned to the competency being considered, as defined in @sec:required-generic-skills.
- **Individual developer (Locally-based):** A single person working on some
  research software - often a researcher with RSE skills. Often time-constrained,
      may be self-taught.
- **Individual developer (RSE team-based):** A single person working on research
  software - generally a professional RSE assigned to support another team's software on their own,
  who however is connected to an RSE team.
- **Group of developers (Locally-based):** A group of RSEs/researchers within
  a research group or team, working together on developing software to support
  or undertake a single research goal/project.
  Similarly to the individual RSE, they are often researchers with RSE skills,

>   often self-taught.

Author: Some clarifications regarding the roles.

- **Group of developers (RSE team-based):** A group of members of the RSE team
  working together on a research software project for a research group.
- **Organisation-level support:** How the defined competencies are recognised
  and represented at an organisational level and what the organisation can
  do to support the RSEs at the different team structures.

>   These can be read as policy/action recommendations.

Author: I have formulated everything as a "Should...", so I think we can recommend these as actions/policies. This could attract more attention to these tables.

Reviewer 2: The use of the word *recommend* triggers my sense, that it might be worthwhile that we actually denote the presence of this section somewhere in th eintro.

Reviewer 2: and thereby it supplements the reference Katerbow2018 in our bibliography.

Reviewer 2: perfect! What about mentioning the DFG reference? I don't quite have an idea, where to fit it in.

Author: I don't see how https://www.dfg.de/formulare/50_01/50_01_en.pdf could fit in the recommendations for organizations. DFG is an organization, sure, but why mention it in this context?

Reviewer 2: not this one, i meant Katerbow2018. this leads here: https://zenodo.org/records/1172988

Reviewer 2: it also provides recommendations for organisations, and also the hierarchy levels in between.

Author: The Katerbow2018 I have already integrated, see just above, last screenshot (citation [32]).

Reviewer 2: Great! Have I looked into the wrong branch again....?

These tables take the perspective of the expected skill set of each developer or team
of developers, similarly to personas in a user experience analysis.

> The current situation may differ.

Author: Disclaimer to help the reader understand the viewpoint. Previously, some items read as "this is how it currently is", while some other items were "this is what an RSE should know". I am still not completely happy with the formulation.

I would read this table as "I am an organization and I need RSEs. Do I need to invest more on individual RSEs, groups of RSEs, local, or team-based? What should I do to help them?

Not sure how to best convey this.

Reviewer 2: the organization column can have a more demanding tone, in order to promote change?

Author: You mean changing "should" to "must"? I guess that is maybe too demanding, isn't it?

Reviewer: I think the reason for using "should" here was that we know, in reality, that it's not going to be practical for organisations to adopt all these recommendations/ideas/guidelines in a comprehensive way - if we say "must" it seems rather unrealistic. Saying that they "should" do something is aimed to highlight that to enable positive change, this is a guideline that "should" be followed. Does that make sense?! 🤔

Reviewer 2: I though more along the following(avoiding the use of must):
Instead of "should offer training and other resources in core topics to support indivdual developers. Should have research software guidance/policies that provide advice" to have sth. like:
Training and other resources in core topics that support individual developers is present. Actionable Research Software guidance/policies are in place.

Author: I don't like the "is present" / "are in place", because it does not sound as recommendation. It is then also confusing whether it is the current situation or a utopia.

I have the impression that "should" is also the form used in other parts of this paper.

Author: @jpthiele what do you think on the format of these recommendations? Is the "Should..." fine, or should we explore other options?

Reviewer 2: then, it's should.

Reviewer 3: I find the formulation "The current situation may differ" a bit unclear; replacing "current" by "actual" or "present-day" would probably bring this sentence closer to the original meaning, although I'm not totally satisfied with these options either. The formulation "this is how it currently is" is probably the clearest, but maybe I'm overthinking it.

Author: @jngrad How about "The **observed** situation may differ"?

Reviewer 3: I looked for alternatives too, like "The state of affairs may differ" (a bit dramatic), or "Your mileage may vary" (too direct, could also be interpreted as condescending). But no matter how I look at it, the phrasing just feels weird to me, perhaps because the statement is redundant with the phrase above it, which already introduced the tables as *expectations*. Let's keep the text as-is, it's no big deal anyway.

    May have additional skills to safeguard potential future development
      and maintenance of the software for external users.&
    Has additional skills or can access support to safeguard potential
      future development and maintenance of the software for external users.&
    Needs to safeguard future development and maintenance of the software for
      external users, but may not have the skills or resources to support this.&
    Applies best practices to prepare the code for external users,
      while the team provides infrastructure and/or specialised RSEs for user support. &
    Should have institutions that are able to offer support with outreach and publicising outputs.
    \\\hline
    %%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
    TEACH&
    May be independently involved in training activities.&
    May be able to support researchers with core technical skills.&
    Shares knowledge and skills within the group (peer support).&
    Supports teaching more widely, either through organised courses
      or ad hoc activities such as ``code clinics''.&
    Should have programs for a diverse range of teaching/training activities,

>       such as an RSE curriculum, as described in~\autoref{subsec:examplemaster}.

Author: Added a reference to the M.Sc. RSE of the appendix.
